docs(PVO11Y-5226): add RECORDING.md and recording rule templates (#1155)
redhat-appstudio/o11y: docs/RECORDING.md

## Recording rules overview

Recording rules pre-compute PromQL expressions and store the results as new time series in RHOBS. They are used to create derived metrics that would be too expensive or complex to compute at query time — most commonly the `konflux_up` availability metric that powers the SLO dashboard and the [Tactical Status Page](https://tsp.status.redhat.com).

Recording rules are defined as `PrometheusRule` resources in the `rhobs/recording/` directory. They share the same Kubernetes kind, deployment pipeline, and testing toolchain as alerting rules.

## Creating a new recording rule

1. Create a new rule file in `rhobs/recording/` — use the [recording rule template](templates/recording_rule_template.yaml) as a starting point

> 2. Write a corresponding test file in `test/promql/tests/recording/` — use the [test template](templates/recording_rule_test_template.yaml) and see [Test file format](#test-file-format)

Reviewer: Does it make sense to have test file template? I think AI has enough knowledge about it and there is nothing special about them in our case 🤔 

Maybe it can perform just fine with saying to cover all the cases of not firing and firing state for best coverage?

Reviewer 2: I would agree with Tom here.

Author: You are right that the AI should have enough information to implement them, but I would still advocate for keeping the template just to apply convention.

Reviewer 2: we don't have alerts test templates either, so I'm not sure that we have a convention for this. But if you think this is useful, we can keep it :)

3. Run validation — see [Validation and testing](#validation-and-testing)
4. Open a PR

## Validation and testing

Recording rules share the same validation toolchain as alerting rules. All commands run inside a container — no local tool install needed.

```
make check-and-test
```

For faster iteration on a single rule:
```
make selective-check-and-test \
  RULE_FILES="rhobs/recording/my_recording_rules.yaml" \
  TEST_CASE_FILES="test/promql/tests/recording/my_recording_rules_test.yaml"
```

YAML linting:
```
make sync_pipenv   # first time only
make lint_yamls
```

### Test file format

Tests use promtool's unit test format — use the [recording rule test template](templates/recording_rule_test_template.yaml) as a starting point.

Test both the expected-up and expected-down cases. For rules with namespace or label filters, include a test case where the input data doesn't match the filter to verify the rule produces no output.

## Architecture

> Recording rules are evaluated by RHOBS (Red Hat Observability Service), not by in-cluster Prometheus. Any metric used in a recording rule expression must first be [forwarded to RHOBS](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/konflux/docs/sop/-/blob/main/o11y/monitoring/tshoot-missing-metrics.md) via [infra-deployments](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments). A rule referencing a metric that isn't forwarded will silently produce no data.

Reviewer 2: Should we also mention how to add recording rules at cluster level? I think a pointer would be useful here.

Author: Added a section about the cluster recording rules.

Reviewer 2: Looks good, created another comment to improve it :)

## Deployment Model

Recording rules are deployed via the same pipeline as alerting rules — see [ALERTS.md § Deployment Model](ALERTS.md#deployment-model). Both use the same [app-interface saas file](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/service/app-interface/-/blob/master/data/services/stonesoup/cicd/saas-rhtap-rules.yaml).

## Conventions

### PrometheusRule structure

Use the [recording rule template](templates/recording_rule_template.yaml) as a starting point. All fields are documented with `[required]` / `[optional]` tags in the template.

### The `konflux_up` availability pattern

> `konflux_up` is a standardized binary metric that every Konflux service should expose. It enables a unified SLO dashboard and the Tactical Status Page to show fleet-wide availability. See [ALERTS.md § Availability alerts](ALERTS.md#availability-alerts-konflux_up-pattern) for the full specification of required labels and how signals are created.

Reviewer: nitpick: Maybe `boolean` instead of 'binary'? (same for the rest of the mentions of "binary")

Reviewer 2: It is binary in the sense of the signal value being 1 or 0. So binary is correct. The boolean value is based on that binary value. Why do you think boolean makes more sense here?

Reviewer: Mainly just wording, when I see binary I imagine "any" binary value right away, not only 0 or 1;
But that is just me probably (hence I called that nitpick lol), so it can be kept like this and I am fine with that

Author: Done, although I found only one mention of binary.

## Recording rules overview

> Recording rules pre-compute PromQL expressions and store the results as new time series in RHOBS. They are used to create derived metrics that would be too expensive or complex to compute at query time — most commonly the `konflux_up` availability metric that powers the SLO dashboard and the [Tactical Status Page](https://tsp.status.redhat.com).

Reviewer 3: > too expensive or complex to compute

Recording rules could also be used to pre-compute queries that are frequently needed: https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/#recording-rules

Might be good to include this fact so the agent understands creating recording rules is not just for expensive queries.

Author: Added a note about this factor.

> Recording rules are defined as `PrometheusRule` resources in the `rhobs/recording/` directory. They share the same Kubernetes kind, deployment pipeline, and testing toolchain as alerting rules.

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense to provide a link to the [PrometheusRule API reference](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/blob/main/Documentation/api-reference/api.md#monitoring.coreos.com/v1.PrometheusRule)?

The idea is for the agent to understand how PrometheusRules generally are structured. Allow it to be versatile in creating recording rule manifests. But unfortunately the whole markdown includes other Prometheus Operator resources so I imagine this will take up context space. And maybe we do not want this to be versatile but follow some set patterns with just the templates. What do you think?

Author: Added a link

Test both the expected-up and expected-down cases. For rules with namespace or label filters, include a test case where the input data doesn't match the filter to verify the rule produces no output.

## Architecture

Recording rules in this repository are evaluated by RHOBS (Red Hat Observability Service), not by in-cluster Prometheus. Any metric used in a recording rule expression must first be [forwarded to RHOBS](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/konflux/docs/sop/-/blob/main/o11y/monitoring/tshoot-missing-metrics.md) via [infra-deployments](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments). A rule referencing a metric that isn't forwarded will silently produce no data.

### Cluster-level recording rules

Recording rules that need to be evaluated by in-cluster Prometheus (rather than RHOBS) are defined in [infra-deployments](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments). They are deployed as `PrometheusRule` resources into the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace via kustomize patches.

Environment overlays patches: `components/monitoring/prometheus/{staging,production}/base/monitoringstack/prometheusrule-uwm.yaml`

> Use cluster-level recording rules when the derived metric is only needed on-cluster.

Reviewer 2: I would only give enough context, but not too much, especially not implementation details that the agent can read from the linked repository.

The agent now knows roughly where to look in the repo, but doesn't need to know the namespace or overlay details.

Also, expand the reasoning on when the recording rules are useful and explain what the rough limits are in RHOBS to enable guessing what "large amount" of metric means.
```suggestion
Recording rules that need to be evaluated by in-cluster Prometheus (rather than RHOBS) are defined in [infra-deployments](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments/components/monitoring/prometheus). 

Use cluster-level recording rules when the derived metric is only needed in-cluster, or the metric has a high cardinality that would use a large amount of our RHOBS metrics quota (quota is ~10 million in production and ~1 million in stage).
```

Reviewer: Also maybe just stick to one, not having `in-cluster` in one paragraph and in second `on-cluster`

Reviewer 2: Updated suggestion to use `in-cluster`

## Architecture

Recording rules in this repository are evaluated by RHOBS (Red Hat Observability Service), not by in-cluster Prometheus. Any metric used in a recording rule expression must first be [forwarded to RHOBS](https://gitlab.cee.redhat.com/konflux/docs/sop/-/blob/main/o11y/monitoring/tshoot-missing-metrics.md) via [infra-deployments](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments). A rule referencing a metric that isn't forwarded will silently produce no data.

### Cluster-level recording rules

> Recording rules that need to be evaluated by in-cluster Prometheus (rather than RHOBS) are defined in [infra-deployments](https://github.com/redhat-appstudio/infra-deployments). They are deployed as `PrometheusRule` resources into the `openshift-user-workload-monitoring` namespace via kustomize patches.

Reviewer: Maybe worth adding the reasoning why defining them in-cluster instead of in RHOBS, as it is to prevent any possibility of cardinality issues? 

But agent or user might not have idea about what will be the cardinality without giving enough information so it is a bit tricky, hmmmmm

Author: Noted
